22.12.2020   
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 433/76
COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2020/2183
of 21 December 2020
concerning certain protective measures in relation to reporting infection with SARS-CoV-2 in minks and other animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and in raccoon dogs

            

               
(notified under document C(2020) 9531)

            

         
(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
Having regard to Council Directive 89/662/EEC of 11 December 1989 concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with a view to the completion of the internal market 
1
, and in particular Article 9(4) thereof,
Having regard to Council Directive 90/425/EEC of 26 June 1990 concerning veterinary checks applicable in intra-Union trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market 
2
, and in particular Article 10(4) thereof,
Whereas:
(1)
Infections with the SARS-CoV-2 virus in minks has been reported in 2020 and it has been established that human-to-mink and mink-to-human transmission can occur. Infections in minks with SARS-CoV-2 have been reported in certain Member States and third countries. Furthermore, a Member State reported human COVID-19 cases infected with SARS-CoV-2 virus variants related to mink. Studies from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of December 2020 indicate that raccoon dogs (
Nyctereutes procyonoides
) are also susceptible to SARS-CoV-2.
(2)
On 12 November 2020, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) published a Rapid Risk Assessment on the detection of new SARS-CoV-2 variants related to mink.
(3)
The ECDC Rapid Risk Assessment concluded that the overall level of risk to human health posed by SARS-CoV-2 mink-related variants can be determined as ranging from low for the general population up to very high for medically vulnerable individuals with occupational exposure. The Rapid Risk Assessment also indicated that further investigations are needed to assess whether SARS-CoV-2 mink-related variants may have any impact on the risk of reinfection, reduced vaccine efficacy or reduced benefit from treatment.
(4)
The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) issued on 12 November 2020 a statement on COVID-19 and mink, indicating that the risk of susceptible animals, such as mink, becoming a SARS-CoV-2 reservoir generates worldwide concern, as any spill over to humans could have public health implications.
(5)
Raccoon dogs are considered susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection and the OIE has called on countries to monitor susceptible animals for SARS-CoV-2 infection, such as mink and raccoon dogs, adopting a One Health approach.
(6)
In accordance with Directive 2003/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 
3
, Member States are to ensure that data on the occurrence of zoonoses and zoonotic agents are collected.
(7)
In accordance with Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425/EEC, each Member State is to immediately notify other Member States and the Commission of outbreaks in its territory, of any zoonoses, diseases or other cause likely to constitute a serious hazard to animals or to human health.
(8)
In accordance with Article 9(1) of Directive 89/662/EEC, each Member State is to immediately notify other Member States and the Commission of outbreaks in its territory, of any zoonoses, diseases or other cause likely to constitute a serious hazard to animals or to human health.
(9)
In addition to those immediate notification requirements, in order to enable a risk assessment under the One Health approach and to inform and identify possible risk-management options as regards the risks arising from the circulation of SARS-CoV-2 mink-related variants in animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and in raccoon dogs
,
 it is necessary to establish an efficient, harmonised reporting system allowing the exchange of all relevant information without delay.
(10)
Given the urgency to assess the risk posed by the epidemiological situation in the Union as regards the occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 in minks and other animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and in raccoon dogs, Member States should submit to the Commission regular reports on the occurrence of that infection in kept or wild animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and in raccoon dogs. To ensure proper risk communication within the Union, the Commission is to share with the Member States a summary of the information collected. It is appropriate to set out the model report in this Decision structuring the data by outbreak and by species susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 virus. This decision should take effect as soon as possible within the legal framework set by Directive 90/425/EEC and Directive 89/662/EEC. The data collected and submitted is subjected to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 
4
 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
(11)
The measures provided for in this Decision are in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed,
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION:
Article 1
1.   Member States shall submit a report to the Commission within three days after the first confirmation within their territory of the infection of minks, and other animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and of raccoon dogs (
Nyctereutes procyonoides
) with SARS-CoV-2.
2.   In case of further occurrences or outbreak of new infections with SARS-CoV-2 in animals referred to in paragraph 1 after the first confirmation referred to in paragraph 1, Member States shall submit, on a weekly basis, a follow-up report. Member States shall also submit the follow-up report when there are relevant updates on the epidemiology of the disease and its zoonotic implications.
3.   The reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall include for each infection occurrence or outbreak the information indicated in the Annex to this Decision.
4.   The reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be communicated in an electronic format to be determined by the Commission in the framework of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed.
Article 2
1.   The Commission shall inform the Member States in the framework of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed of the reports submitted by the Member States in accordance with Article 1.
2.   The Commission shall publish on its website, for information purposes only, an updated summary of the information contained in the reports submitted by the Member States in accordance with Article 1.
Article 3
This Decision shall apply until 20 April 2021.
Article 4
This Decision is addressed to the Member States.
Done at Brussels, 21 December 2020.

                  
For the Commission

               
Stella KYRIAKIDES

                  
Member of the Commission

               

            
1
  
.

            
2
  
.

            
3
  Directive 2003/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents, amending Council Decision 90/424/EEC and repealing Council Directive 92/117/EEC (
).

            
4
  Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (
).
ANNEX
Information to be contained in the reports referred to in Article 1 in relation to the occurrences of infection with SARS-CoV-2 in minks and other animals of the family 
Mustelidae
 and in raccoon dogs (‘susceptible species’)
1.   

                  
Date of reporting;

               
2.   

                  
Member State;

               
3.   

                  
Type of report (first confirmation report/weekly follow-up report);

               
4.   

                  
Total number of outbreaks/occurrences in the Member State included in the report;

               
5.   
For each outbreak/occurrence provide:
(a)
Serial number of each outbreak/occurrence in the Member State;
(b)
Region and approximate geographical location of the establishment or other place where animals were kept or located;
(c)
Date of suspicion;
(d)
Date of confirmation;
(e)
Diagnostic method(s);
(f)
Date of estimation of introduction of the virus in the establishment or place;
(g)
Possible source of the virus;
(h)
Control measures taken (details 
1
);
(i)
Number of susceptible animals on establishment or at the place (by susceptible species);
(j)
Number of animals clinically or subclinically affected on establishment or at the place (by susceptible species; in case an exact figure is not available, provide an estimate);
(k)
Morbidity: number of animals (by susceptible species) clinically affected, with signs resembling COVID-19, on establishment or at the place in relation to the number of susceptible animals with a summary description of the clinical signs (in case an exact figure is not available, provide an estimate);
(l)
Mortality: number of animals (by susceptible species) that have died on establishment or at the place (in case an exact figure is not available, provide an estimate);
6.   

                  
Data on molecular epidemiology, significant mutations;

               
7.   

                  
Relevant data on human cases in the Member State directly related to animal outbreaks/occurrences referred to in Article 1(1) and (2);

               
8.   

                  
Other relevant information.

               

               
1
  Movement control inside the country; surveillance within containment or protection zone; traceability; quarantine; official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste; stamping out; control of wildlife reservoirs; zoning; disinfection; vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists); no treatment of affected animals and other relevant measures.
